<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Of Adam’s Title to Sovereignty by Fatherhood</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>THERE is one thing more, and then I think I have given you all that our author brings for proof of <i>Adam</i>’s sovereignty, and that is a supposition of a natural right of dominion over his children, by being their father: and this title of <i>fatherhood</i> he is so pleased with, that you will find it brought in almost in every page; particularly he says, <i>not only</i> Adam, <i>but the succeeding patriarchs had by right of fatherhood royal authority over their children,</i> p. 12. And in the same page, <i>this subjection of children being the fountain of all regal authority,</i> &amp;c. This being, as one would think by his so frequent mentioning it, the main basis of all his frame, we may well expect clear and evident reason for it, since he lays it down as a position necessary to his purpose, that <i>every man that is born is so far from being free, that by his very birth he becomes a subject of him that begets him,</i> Observations, 156. so that <i>Adam</i> being the only man created, and all ever since being begotten, no body has been born free. If we ask how <i>Adam</i> comes by this power over his children, he tells us here it is by begetting them: and so again, <i>Observations,</i> 223. <i>this natural dominion of</i> Adam, says he, <i>may be proved out of</i> Grotius <i>himself, who teacheth, that generatione jus acquiritur parentibus in liberos.</i> And indeed the act of begetting being that which makes a man a father, his right of a father over his children can naturally arise from nothing else.</p>
			<p><i>Grotius</i> tells us not here how far this <i>jus in liberos,</i> this power of parents over their children extends; but our author, always very clear in the point, assures us, it is <i>supreme power,</i> and like that of absolute monarchs over their slaves, absolute power of life and death. He that should demand of him, how, or for what reason it is, that begetting a child gives the father such an absolute power over him, will find him answer nothing: we are to take his word for this, as well as several other things; and by that the laws of nature and the constitutions of government must stand or fall. Had he been an absolute monarch, this way of talking might have suited well enough; <i>proratione voluntas</i> might have been of force in his mouth; but in the way of proof or argument is very unbecoming, and will little advantage his plea for absolute monarchy. Sir <i>Robert</i> has too much lessened a subject’s authority to leave himself the hopes of establishing any thing by his bare saying it; one slave’s opinion without proof is not of weight enough to dispose of the liberty and fortunes of all mankind. If all men are not, as I think they are, naturally equal, I am sure all slaves are; and then I may without presumption oppose my single opinion to his; and be confident that my saying, <i>that begetting of children makes them not slaves to their fathers, as certainly</i> sets all mankind free, as his affirming the contrary makes them all slaves. But that this position, which is the foundation of all their doctrine, who would have monarchy to be <i>jure divino,</i> may have all fair play, let us hear what reasons others give for it, since our author offers none.</p>
			<p>The argument, I have heard others make use of, to prove that fathers, by begetting them, come by an absolute power over their children, is this; that <i>fathers have a power over the lives of their children, because they give them life and being,</i> which is the only proof it is capable of: since there can be no reason, why naturally one man should have any claim or pretence of right over that in another, which was never his, which he bestowed not, but was received from the bounty of another. 1. I answer, that every one who gives another any thing, has not always thereby a right to take it away again. But 2. They who say the <i>father</i> gives life to his children, are so dazzled with the thoughts of monarchy, that they do not, as they ought, remember God, who is <i>the author and giver of life: it is in him alone we live, move, and have our being.</i> How can he be thought to give life to another, that knows not wherein his own life consists? Philosophers are at a loss about it after their most diligent enquiries; and anatomists, after their whole lives and studies spent in dissections, and diligent examining the bodies of men, confess their ignorance in the structure and use of many parts of man’s body, and in that operation wherein life consists in the whole. And doth the rude plough-man, or the more ignorant voluptuary, frame or fashion such an admirable engine as this is, and then put life and sense into it? Can any man say, he formed the parts that are necessary to the life of his child? or can he suppose himself to give the life, and yet not know what subject is fit to receive it, nor what actions or organs are necessary for its reception or preservation?</p>
			<p>To give life to that which has yet no being, is to frame and make a living creature, fashion the parts, and mould and suit them to their uses, and having proportioned and fitted them together, to put into them a living soul. He that could do this, might indeed have some pretence to destroy his own workmanship. But is there any one so bold, that dares thus far arrogate to himself the incomprehensible works of the almighty? Who alone did at first, and continues still to make a living soul, he alone can breathe in the breath of life. If any one thinks himself an artist at this, let him number up the parts of his child’s body which he hath made, tell me their uses and operations, and when the living and rational soul began to inhabit this curious structure, when sense began, and how this engine, which he has framed, thinks and reasons: if he made it, let him, when it is out of order, mend it, at least tell wherein the defects lie. <i>Shall he that made the eye not see?</i> says the Psalmist, <i>Psalm</i> xciv. 9. See these men’s vanities! the structure of that one part is sufficient to convince us of an all-wise contriver, and he has so visible a claim to us as his workmanship, that one of the ordinary appellations of God in scripture is, <i>God our Maker, and the Lord our Maker.</i> And therefore though our author, for the magnifying his <i>fatherhood,</i> be pleased to say, <i>Observations,</i> 159. <i>That even the power which God himself exerciseth over mankind is by right of fatherhood,</i> yet this fatherhood is such an one as utterly excludes all pretence of title in earthly parents; for he is <i>king,</i> because he is indeed maker of us all, which no parents can pretend to be of their children.</p>
			<p>But had men skill and power to make their children, it is not so slight a piece of workmanship, that it can be imagined, they could make them without designing it. What father of a thousand, when he begets a child, thinks farther than the satisfying his present appetite? God in his infinite wisdom has put strong defires of copulation into the constitution of men, thereby to continue the race of mankind, which he doth most commonly without the intention, and often against the consent and will of the begetter. And indeed those who desire and design children, are but the occasions of their being, and when they design and wish to beget them, do little more towards their making, than <i>Deucalion</i> and his wife in the fable did towards the making of mankind, by throwing pebbles over their heads.</p>
			<p>But grant that the parents made their children, gave them life and being, and that hence there followed an absolute power. This would give the <i>father</i> but a joint dominion with the mother over them: for no body can deny but that the woman hath an equal share, if not the greater, as nourishing the child a long time in her own body out of her own substance: there it is fashioned, and from her it receives the materials and principles of its constitution: and it is so hard to imagine the rational soul should presently inhabit the yet unformed embrio, as soon as the father has done his part in the act of generation, that if it must be supposed to derive any thing from the parents, it must certainly owe most to the mother. But be that as it will, the mother cannot be denied an equal share in begetting of the child, and so the absolute authority of the <i>father</i> will not arise from hence. Our author indeed is of another mind; for he says, <i>We know that God at the creation gave the sovereignty to the man over the woman, as being the nobler and principal agent in generation,</i> Observations, 172. I remember not this in my Bible; and when the place is brought where God at the <i>creation</i> gave the sovereignty to man over the woman, and that for this reason, because <i>he is the nobler and principal agent in generation,</i> it will be time enough to consider, and answer it. But it is no new thing for our author to tell us his own fancies for certain and divine truths, tho’ there be often a great deal of difference between his and divine revelations; for God in the scripture says, <i>his father and his mother that begot him.</i></p>
			<p>They who alledge the practice of mankind, for <i>exposing or selling</i> their children, as a proof of their power over them, are with Sir <i>Robert</i> happy arguers; and cannot but recommend their opinion, by founding it on the most shameful action, and most unnatural murder, human nature is capable of. The dens of lions and nurseries of wolves know no such cruelty as this: these savage inhabitants of the desert obey God and nature in being tender and careful of their off-spring: they will hunt, watch, fight, and almost starve for the preservation of their young; never part with them; never forsake them, till they are able to shift for themselves. And is it the privilege of man alone to act more contrary to nature than the wild and most untamed part of the creation? doth God forbid us under the severest penalty, that of death, to take away the life of any man, a stranger, and upon provocation? and does he permit us to destroy those, he has given us the charge and care of; and by the dictates of nature and reason, as well as his revealed command, requires us to preserve? He has in all the parts of the creation taken a peculiar care to propagate and continue the several species of creatures, and makes the individuals act so strongly to this end, that they sometimes neglect their own private good for it, and seem to forget that general rule, which nature teaches all things, of self-preservation; and the preservation of their young, as the strongest principle in them, over-rules the constitution of their particular natures. Thus we see, when their young stand in need of it, the timorous become valiant, the fierce and savage kind, and the ravenous tender and liberal.</p>
			<p>But if the example of what hath been done, be the rule of what ought to be, history would have furnished our author with instances of this <i>absolute fatherly power</i> in its height and perfection, and he might have shewed us in <i>Peru,</i> people that begot children on purpose to fatten and eat them. The story is so remarkable, that I cannot but set it down in the author’s words. “In some provinces, <i>says he,</i> they were so liquorish after man’s flesh, that they would not have the patience to stay till the breath was out of the body, but would suck the blood as it ran from the wounds of the dying man; they had public shambles of man’s flesh, and their madness herein was to that degree, that they spared not their own children, which they had begot on strangers taken in war: for they made their captives their mistresses, and choicely nourished the children they had by them, till about thirteen years old they butchered and eat them; and they served the mothers after the same fashion, when they grew past child bearing, and ceased to bring them any more roasters,” <i>Garcilasso de la Vega hist. des Yncas de Peru,</i> l. i. c. 12.</p>
			<p>Thus far can the busy mind of man carry him to a brutality below the level of beasts, when he quits his reason, which places him almost equal to angels. Nor can it be otherwise in a creature, whose thoughts are more than the sands, and wider than the ocean, where fancy and passion must needs run him into strange courses, if reason, which is his only star and compass, be not that he steers by. The imagination is always restless, and suggests variety of thoughts, and the will, reason being laid aside, is ready for every extravagant project; and in this state, he that goes farthest out of the way, is thought fittest to lead, and is sure of most followers: and when fashion hath once established what folly or craft began, custom makes it sacred, and it will be thought impudence, or madness, to contradict or question it. He that will impartially survey the nations of the world, will find so much of their religions, governments and manners, brought in and continued amongst them by these means, that he will have but little reverence for the practices which are in use and credit amongst men; and will have reason to think, that the woods and forests, where the irrational untaught inhabitants keep right by following nature, are fitter to give us rules, than cities and palaces, where those that call themselves civil and rational, go out of their way, by the authority of example. If precedents are sufficient to establish a rule in this case, our author might have found in holy writ children sacrificed by their parents, and this amongst the people of God themselves: the <i>Psalmist</i> tells us, <i>Psal.</i> cvi. 38. <i>They shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan.</i> But God judged not of this by our author’s rule, nor allowed of the authority of practice against his righteous law; but as it follows there, <i>the land was polluted with blood; therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, insomuch that he abborred his own inheritance.</i> The killing of their children, though it were fashionable, was charged on them as <i>innocent blood,</i> and so had in the account of God the guilt of murder, as the offering them to idols had the guilt of idolatry.</p>
			<p>Be it then, as Sir <i>Robert</i> says, that <i>anciently</i> it was usual for men <i>to sell and castrate their children,</i> Observations, 155. Let it be, that they exposed them; add to it, if you please, for this is still greater power, that they begat them for their tables, to fat and eat them: if this proves a right to do so, we may, by the same argument, justify adultery, incest and sodomy, for there are examples of these too, both ancient and modern; sins, which I suppose have their principal aggravation from this, that they cross the main intention of nature, which willeth the increase of mankind, and the continuation of the species in the highest perfection, and the distinction of families, with the security of the marriage bed, as necessary thereunto.</p>
			<p>In confirmation of this natural authority of the father, our author brings a lame proof from the positive command of God in scripture: his words are, <i>To confirm the natural right of regal power, we find in the Decalogue, that the law which enjoins obedience to kings, is delivered in the terms, Honour thy father,</i> p. 23. <i>Whereas many confess, that government only in the abstract, is the ordinance of God, they are not able to prove any such ordinance in the scripture, but only in the fatherly power; and therefore we find the commandment, that enjoins obedience to superiors, given in the terms, Honour thy father; so that not only the power and right of government, but the form of the power governing, and the person having the power, are all the ordinances of God. The first father had not only simply power, but power monarchical, as he was father immediately from God,</i> Observations, 254. To the same purpose, the same law is cited by our author in several other places, and just after the same fashion; that is, <i>and mother,</i> as apochryphal words, are always left out; a great argument of our author’s ingenuity, and the goodness of his cause, which required in its defender zeal to a degree of warmth, able to warp the sacred rule of the word of God, to make it comply with his present occasion; a way of proceeding not unusual to those, who embrace not truths because reason and revelation offer them, but espouse tenets and parties for ends different from truth, and then resolve at any rate to defend them; and so do with the words and sense of authors, they would fit to their purpose, just as <i>Procrustes</i> did with his guests, lop or stretch them, as may best fit them to the size of their notions: and they always prove like those so served, deformed, lame, and useless.</p>
			<p>For had our author set down this command without garbling, as God gave it, and joined <i>mother</i> to father, every reader would have seen, that it had made directly against him; and that it was so far from establishing the <i>monarchical power of the father,</i> that it set up the <i>mother</i> equal with him, and enjoined nothing but what was due in common, to both father and mother: for that is the constant tenor of the scripture, <i>Honour thy father and thy mother,</i> Exod. xx. <i>He that smiteth his father or mother, shall surely be put to death,</i> xxi. 15. <i>He that curseth his father or mother, shall surely be put to death, ver.</i> 17. Repeated <i>Lev.</i> xx. 9. and by our Saviour, <i>Matth.</i> xv. 4. <i>Ye shall fear every man his mother and his father,</i> Lev. xix. 3. <i>If a man have a rebellious son, which will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother; then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him, and say, This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice,</i> Deut. xxi. 18, 19, 20, 21. <i>Cunsed be he that setteth light by his father or his mother,</i> xxviii. 16. <i>My son, hear the instructions of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother,</i> are the words of <i>Solomon,</i> a king who was not ignorant of what belonged to him as a father or a king; and yet he joins <i>father</i> and <i>mother</i> together, in all the instructions he gives children quite thro’ his book of <i>Proverbs. Woe unto him, that sayeth unto his father, What begettest thou, or to the woman, What hast thou brought forth?</i> Isa. xi. ver. 10. <i>In thee have they set light by father or mother,</i> Ezek. xxviii. 2. <i>And it shall come to pass, that when any shall yet prophesy, then his father and his mother that begat him, shall say unto him, Thou shalt not live, and his father and his mother that begat him, shall thrust him through when he prophesieth,</i> Zech. xiii. 3. Here not the father only, but the father and mother jointly, had power in this case of life and death. Thus ran the law of the Old Testament, and in the New they are likewise joined, in the obedience of their children, <i>Eph.</i> vi. 1. The rule is, <i>Children, obey your parents;</i> and I do not remember, that I any where read, <i>Children, obey your father,</i> and no more: the scripture joins <i>mother</i> too in that homage, which is due from children; and had there been any text, where the honour or obedience of children had been directed to the <i>father</i> alone, it is not likely that our author, who pretends to build all upon scripture, would have omitted it: nay, the scripture makes the authority of <i>father and mother,</i> in respect of those they have begot, so equal, that in some places it neglects even the priority of order, which is thought due to the father, and the <i>mother</i> is put first, as <i>Lev.</i> xix. 3. from which so constantly joining father and mother together, as is found quite through the scripture, we may conclude that the honour they have a title to from their children, is one common right belonging so equally to them both, that neither can claim it wholly, neither can be excluded.</p>
			<p>One would wonder then how our author infers from the 5th commandment, that all <i>power was originally in the father;</i> how he finds <i>monarchical power of government settled and fixed by the commandment, Honour thy father and thy mother.</i> If all the honour due by the commandment, be it what it will, be the only right of the <i>father,</i> because he, as our author says, <i>has the sovereignty over the woman, as being the nobler and principler agent in generation,</i> why did God afterwards all along join the <i>mother</i> with him, to share in his honour? can the father, by this sovereignty of his, discharge the child from paying this honour to his <i>mother?</i> The scripture gave no such licence to the <i>Jews,</i> and yet there were often breaches wide enough betwixt husband and wife, even to divorce and separation: and, I think, no body will say a child may with-hold honour from his mother, or, as the scripture terms it, <i>set light by her,</i> though his father should command him to do so; no more than the mother could dispense with him for neglecting to <i>honour</i> his father: whereby it is plain, that this command of God gives the father no sovereignty, no supremacy.</p>
			<p>I agree with our author that the title to this <i>honour</i> is vested in the parents by nature, and is a right which accrues to them by their having begotten their children, and God by many positive declarations has confirmed it to them: I also allow our author’s rule, <i>that in grants and gifts, that have their original from God and nature, as the power of the father,</i> (let me add <i>and mother,</i> for whom God hath joined together, let no man put asunder) <i>no inferior power of men can limit, nor make any law of prescription against them,</i> Observations, 158. so that the mother having, by this law of God, a right to honour from her children, which is not subject to the will of her husband, we see this <i>absolute monarchical power of the father</i> can neither be founded on it, nor consist with it; and he has a power very far from <i>monarchical,</i> very far from that absoluteness our author contends for, when another has over his subjects the same power he hath, and by the same title: and therefore he cannot forbear saying himself that <i>he cannot see how any man’s children can be free from subjection to their parents,</i> p. 12. which, in common speech, I think, signifies <i>mother</i> as well as <i>father,</i> or if <i>parents</i> here signifies only <i>father,</i> it is the first time I ever yet knew it to do so, and by such an use of words one may say any thing.</p>
			<p>By our author’s doctrine, the father having absolute jurisdiction over his children, has also the same over their issue; and the consequence is good, were it true, that the father had such a power: and yet I ask our author whether the grandfather, by his sovereignty, could discharge the grandchild from paying to his father the honour due to him by the 5th commandment. If the grandfather hath, by <i>right of fatherhood,</i> sole sovereign power in him, and that obedience which is due to the supreme magistrate, be commanded in these words, <i>Honour thy father,</i> it is certain the grandfather might dispense with the grandson’s honouring his father, which since it is evident in common sense he cannot, it follows from hence, that <i>Honour thy father and mother,</i> cannot mean an absolute subjection to a sovereign power, but something else. The right therefore which parents have by nature, and which is confirmed to them by the 5th commandment, cannot be that political dominion, which our author would derive from it: for that being in every civil society supreme somewhere, can discharge any subject from any political obedience to any one of his fellow subjects. But what law of the magistrate can give a child liberty, not to <i>honour his father and mother?</i> It is an eternal law, annexed purely to the relation of parents and children, and so contains nothing of the magistrate’s power in it, nor is subjected to it.</p>
			<p>Our author says, <i>God hath given to a father a right or liberty to alien his power over his children to any other,</i> Observations, 155. I doubt whether he can <i>alien</i> wholly the right of <i>honour</i> that is due from them: but be that as it will, this I am sure, he cannot <i>alien,</i> and retain the same power. If therefore the magistrate’s sovereignty be, as our author would have it, <i>nothing but the authority of a supreme father,</i> p. 23. it is unavoidable, that if the magistrate hath all this paternal right, as he must have if <i>fatherhood</i> be the fountain of all authority; then the subjects, though fathers, can have no power over their children, no right to honour from them: for it cannot be all in another’s hands, and a part remain with the parents. So that, according to our author’s own doctrine, <i>Honour thy father and mother</i> cannot possibly be understood of political subjection and obedience; since the laws both in the Old and New Testament, that commanded children to <i>honour and obey their parents,</i> were given to such, whose fathers were under civil government, and fellow subjects with them in political societies; and to have bid them <i>honour and obey their parents,</i> in our author’s sense, had been to bid them be subjects to those who had no title to it; the right to obedience from subjects, being all vested in another; and instead of teaching obedience, this had been to foment sedition, by setting up powers that were not. If therefore this command, <i>Honour thy father and mother,</i> concern political dominion, it directly overthrows our author’s monarchy; since it being to be paid by every child to his father, even in society, every father must necessarily have political dominion, and there will be as many sovereigns as there are fathers: besides that the mother too hath her title, which destroys the sovereignty of one supreme monarch. But if <i>Honour thy father and mother</i> mean something distinct from political power, as necessarily it must, it is besides our author’s business, and serves nothing to his purpose.</p>
			<p><i>The law that enjoins obedience to kings is delivered,</i> says our author, <i>in the terms, Honour thy father, as if all power were originally in the father,</i> Observations, 254: and that law is also delivered, say I, in the terms, <i>Honour thy mother,</i> as if all power were originally in the mother. I appeal whether the argument be not as good on one side as the other, <i>father and mother</i> being joined all along in the Old and New Testament where-ever honour or obedience is injoined children. Again our author tells us, Observations, 254. <i>that this command, Honour thy father, gives the right to govern, and makes the form of government monarchical.</i> To which I answer, that if by <i>Honour thy father</i> be meant obedience to the political power of the magistrate, it concerns not any duty we owe to our natural fathers, who are subjects; because they, by our author’s doctrine, are divested of all that power, it being placed wholly in the prince, and so being equally subjects and slaves with their children, can have no right, by that title, to any such <i>honour or obedience,</i> as contains in it political subjection: if <i>Honour thy father and mother</i> signifies the duty we owe our natural parents, as by our Saviour’s interpretation, <i>Matth.</i> xv. 4. and all the other mentioned places, it is plain it does, then it cannot concern political obedience, but a duty that is owing to persons, who have no title to sovereignty, nor any political authority as magistrates over subjects. For the person of a private father, and a title to obedience, due to the supreme magistrate, are things inconsistent; and therefore this command, which must necessarily comprehend the persons of our natural fathers, must mean a duty we owe them distinct from our obedience to the magistrate, and from which the most absolute power of princes cannot absolve us. What this duty is, we shall in its due place examine.</p>
			<p>And thus we have at last got thro’ all, that in our author looks like an argument for that <i>absolute unlimited sovereignty</i> described, sect. 8. which he supposes in <i>Adam;</i> so that mankind ever since have been all born <i>slaves,</i> without any title to freedom. But if <i>creation,</i> which gave nothing but a being, made not <i>Adam prince of his posterity:</i> if <i>Adam, Gen.</i> i. 28. was not constituted lord of mankind, nor had a <i>private dominion</i> given him exclusive of his children, but only a right and power over the earth, and inferiour creatures in common with the children of men; if also <i>Gen.</i> iii. 16. God gave not any political power to <i>Adam</i> over his wife and children, but only subjected <i>Eve</i> to <i>Adam,</i> as a punishment, or foretold the subjection of the weaker sex, in the ordering the common concernments of their families, but gave not thereby to <i>Adam,</i> as to the husband, power of life and death, which necessarily belongs to the magistrate: if fathers by begetting their children acquire no such power ove them; and if the command, <i>Honour thy father and mother,</i> give it not, but only enjoins a duty owing to parents equally, whether subjects or not, and to the <i>mother</i> as well as the <i>father;</i> if all this be so, as I think, by what has been said, is very evident; then man has a <i>natural freedom,</i> notwithstanding all our author confidently says to the contrary; since all that share in the same common nature, faculties and powers, are in nature equal, and ought to partake in the same common rights and privileges, till the manifest appointment of God, who is <i>Lord over all, blessed for ever,</i> can be produced to shew any particular person’s supremacy; or a man’s own consent subjects him to a superiour. This is so plain, that our author confesses, that Sir <i>John Hayward, Blackwood</i> and <i>Barclay, the great vindicators of the right of kings,</i> could not deny it, <i>but admit with one consent the natural liberty and equality of mankind,</i> for a truth unquestionable. And our author hath been so far from producing any thing, that may make good his great position, <i>that Adam was absolute monarch,</i> and so <i>men are not naturally free,</i> that even his own proofs make against him; so that to use his own way of arguing, <i>the first erroneous principle failing, the whole fabric of this vast engine of</i> absolute power <i>and</i> tyranny <i>drops down of itself,</i> and there needs no more to be said in answer to all that he builds upon so false and frail a foundation.</p>
			<p>But to save others the pains, were there any need, he is not sparing himself to shew, by his own contradictions, the weakness of his own doctrine. <i>Adam</i>’s absolute and sole dominion is that, which he is every where full of, and all along builds on, and yet he tells us, p. 12. <i>that as</i> Adam <i>was lard of his children, so his children under him had a command and power over their own children.</i> The unlimited and undivided sovereignty of <i>Adam</i>’s <i>fatherhood,</i> by our author’s computation, stood but a little while, only during the first generation, but as soon as he had grand-children, Sir <i>Robert</i> could give but a very ill account of it. <i>Adam, as father of his children,</i> faith he, <i>hath an absolute, unlimited royal power over them, and by virtue thereof over those that they begot, and so to all generations;</i> and yet <i>his children,</i> viz. <i>Cain</i> and <i>Seth,</i> have a paternal power over their children at the same time; so that they are at the same time <i>absolute lords,</i> and yet <i>vassals</i> and <i>slaves; Adam</i> has all the authority, as <i>grand-father of the people,</i> and they have a part of it as fathers of a part of them: he is absolute over them and their posterity, by having begotten them, and yet they are absolute over their children by the same title. <i>No,</i> says our author, <i>Adam’s children under him had power over their own children, but still with subordination to the first parent.</i> A good distinction that sounds well, and it is pity it signifies nothing, nor can be reconciled with our author’s words. I readily grant, that supposing <i>Adam</i>’s <i>absolute power</i> over his posterity, any of his children might have from him a delegated, and so a <i>subordinate</i> power over a part, or all the rest: but that cannot be the power our author speaks of here; it is not a power by grant and commission, but the natural paternal power he supposes a father to have over his children. For 1. he says, <i>As</i> Adam <i>was lord of his children, so his children under him had a power over their own children:</i> they were then lords over their own children after the same manner, and by the same title, that <i>Adam</i> was, <i>i. e.</i> by right of generation, by right of <i>fatherhood.</i> 2. It is plain he means the natural power of fathers, because he limits it to be only <i>over their own children;</i> a delegated power has no such limitation, as only over their own children, it might be over others, as well as their own children. 3. If it were a delegated power, it must appear in scripture; but there is no ground in scripture to affirm, that <i>Adam</i>’s children had any other power over theirs, than what they naturally had as fathers.</p>
			<p>But that he means here paternal power, and no other, is past doubt, from the inference he makes in these words immediately following, <i>I see not then how the children of</i> Adam, <i>or of any man else, can be free from subjection to their parents.</i> Whereby it appears that the <i>power</i> on one side, and the <i>subjection</i> on the other, our author here speaks of, is that <i>natural power</i> and <i>subjection</i> between parents and children: for that which every man’s children owed, could be no other; and that our author always affirms to be absolute and unlimited. This natural <i>power</i> of parents over their children, <i>Adam</i> had over his posterity, says our author; and this <i>power</i> of parents over their children, his children had over theirs in his life-time, says our author also; so that <i>Adam,</i> by a natural right of father, had an absolute unlimited power over all his posterity, and at the same time his children had by the same right absolute unlimited power over theirs. Here then are two absolute unlimited powers existing together, which I would have any body reconcile one to another, or to common sense. For the <i>salvo</i> he has put in of <i>subordination,</i> makes it more absurd: to have one <i>absolute, unlimited,</i> nay <i>unlimitable power</i> in subordination to another, is so manifest a contradiction, that nothing can be more. Adam <i>is absolute prince with the unlimited authority of fatherhood over all his posterity;</i> all his posterity are then absolutely his subjects; and, as our author says, his slaves, children, and grand-children, are equally in this state of subjection and slavery; and yet, says our author, <i>the children of</i> Adam <i>have paternal,</i> i. e. <i>absolute unlimited power over their own children:</i> Which in plain <i>English</i> is, they are slaves and absolute princes at the same time, and in the same government; and one part of the subjects have an absolute unlimited power over the other by the natural right of parentage.</p>
			<p>If any one will suppose, in favour of our author, that he here meant, that parents, who are in subjection themselves to the absolute authority of their father, have yet some power over their children; I confess he is something nearer the truth: but he will not at all hereby help our author: for he no where speaking of the paternal power, but as an absolute unlimited authority, cannot be supposed to understand any thing else here, unless he himself had limited it, and shewed how far it reached. And that he means here paternal authority in that large extent, is plain from the immediate following words; <i>This subjection of children being,</i> says he, <i>the foundation of all regal authority,</i> p. 12. <i>the subjection</i> then that in the former line, he says, <i>every man is in to his parents,</i> and consequently what <i>Adam</i>’s grand-children were in to their parents, was that which was the fountain of all <i>regal authority,</i> i. e. according to our author, <i>absolute unlimitable authority.</i> And thus <i>Adam</i>’s children had <i>regal authority</i> over their children, whilst they themselves were subjects to their father, and fellow-subjects with their children. But let him mean as he pleases, it is plain he allows <i>Adam’s children to have paternal power,</i> p. 12. as also all other fathers to have <i>paternal power over their children,</i> Observations, 156. From whence one of these two things will necessarily follow, that either <i>Adam</i>’s children, even in his life-time, had, and so all other fathers have, as he phrases it, p. 12. <i>by right of fatherhood, royal authority over their children,</i> or else, that <i>Adam, by right of fatherhood, had not royal authority.</i> For it cannot be but that <i>paternal power</i> does, or does not, give <i>royal authority</i> to them that have it: if it does not, then <i>Adam</i> could not be sovereign by this title, nor any body else; and then there is an end of all our author’s politics at once: if it does give <i>royal authority,</i> then every one that has <i>paternal power</i> has <i>royal authority;</i> and then, by our author’s patriarchal government, there will be as many kings as there are fathers.</p>
			<p>And thus what a monarchy he hath set up, let him and his disciples consider. Princes certainly will have great reason to thank him for these new politics, which set up as many absolute kings in every country as there are fathers of children. And yet who can blame our author for it, it lying unavoidably in the way of one discoursing upon our author’s principles? For having placed an <i>absolute power</i> in <i>fathers by right of begetting,</i> he could not easily resolve how much of this power belonged to a son over the children he had begotten; and so it fell out to be a very hard matter to give all the power, as he does, to <i>Adam,</i> and yet allow a part in his life-time to his children, when they were parents, and which he knew not well how to deny them. This makes him so doubtful in his expressions, and so uncertain where to place this absolute natural power, which he calls <i>fatherhood.</i> Sometimes <i>Adam</i> alone has it all, as p. 13. <i>Observations,</i> 244, 245. <i>&amp; Pref.</i></p>
			<p>Sometimes <i>parents</i> have it, which word scarce signifies the father alone, p. 12, 19.</p>
			<p>Sometimes <i>children</i> during their fathers life-time, as p. 12.</p>
			<p>Sometimes <i>fathers</i> of <i>families,</i> as p. 78, and 79.</p>
			<p>Sometimes <i>fathers</i> indefinitely, <i>Observations,</i> 155.</p>
			<p>Sometimes <i>the heir to Adam,</i> Observations, 253.</p>
			<p>Sometimes <i>the posterity of Adam,</i> 244, 246.</p>
			<p>Sometimes <i>prime fathers, all sons or grand-children of</i> Noah, <i>Observations,</i> 244.</p>
			<p>Sometimes the <i>eldest parents,</i> p. 12.</p>
			<p>Sometimes all <i>kings,</i> p. 19.</p>
			<p>Sometimes all that have supreme power, <i>Observations,</i> 245.</p>
			<p>Sometimes <i>heirs to those first progenitors, who were at first the natural parents of the whole people,</i> p. 19.</p>
			<p>Sometimes an elective king, p. 23.</p>
			<p>Sometimes those, whether a few or a multitude, that govern the <i>common-wealth,</i> p. 23.</p>
			<p>Sometimes he that can catch it, an <i>usurper,</i> p. 23. Observations, 155.</p>
			<p>Thus this <i>new nothing,</i> that is to carry with it all power, authority, and government; <i>this fatherhood,</i> which is to design the person, and establish the throne of monarchs, whom the people are to obey, may, according to Sir <i>Robert,</i> come into any hands, any how, and so by his politics give to democracy royal authority, and make an usurper a lawful prince. And if it will do all these fine feats, much good do our author and all his followers with their omnipotent <i>fatherhood,</i> which can serve for nothing but to unsettle and destroy all the lawful governments in the world, and to establish in their room disorder, tyranny, and usurpation.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
