<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“In grants and gifts that have their original from God, or nature, as the power of the father hath no inferior power of man can limit, nor shake any law of prescription against them.” <abbr epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Obs.</abbr> 158.</p>
					<p>“The scripture teaches, that supreme power was originally in the father, without any limitation.” <abbr epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Obs.</abbr> 245. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is no improbable opinion, therefore, which the arch-philosopher was of, “That the chief person in every household was always, as it were, a king: so when numbers of households joined themselves in civil societies together, kings were the first kind of governors amongst them, which is also, as it seemeth, the reason why the name of fathers continued still in them, who, of fathers, were made rulers; as also the ancient custom of governors to do as Melchizedeck, and being kings, to exercise the office of priests, which fathers did at the first, grew perhaps by the same occasion. Howbeit, this is not the only kind of regiment that has been received in the world. The inconveniences of one kind have caused sundry others to be devised; so that, in a word, all public regiment, of what kind soever, seemeth evidently to have risen from the deliberate advice, consultation, and composition between men, judging it convenient and behoveful; there being no impossibility in nature considered by itself, but that man might have lived without any public regiment.” Hooker’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Eccl. P.</abbr></i> <abbr xml:lang="la">l.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr xml:lang="la">sect.</abbr> 10. <a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“The public power of all society is above every soul contained in the same society; and the principal use of that power is, to give laws unto all that are under it, which laws in such cases we must obey, unless there be reason showed which may necessarily inforce, that the law of reason, or of God, doth enjoin the contrary.” <abbr>Hook.</abbr> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Eccl. Pol.</abbr></i> <abbr xml:lang="la">l.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr xml:lang="la">sect.</abbr> 16. <a href="chapter-2-7.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“To take away all such mutual grievances, injuries and wrongs,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> such as attend men in the state of nature, “there was no way but only by growing into composition and agreement amongst themselves, by ordaining some kind of government public, and by yielding themselves subject thereunto, that unto whom they granted authority to rule and govern, by them the peace, tranquillity, and happy state of the rest might be procured. Men always knew that where force and injury was offered, they might be defenders of themselves; they knew that however men may seek their own commodity, yet if this were done with injury unto others, it was not to be suffered, but by all men, and all good means to be withstood. Finally, they knew that no man might in reason take upon him to determine his own right, and according to his own determination proceed in maintenance thereof, in as much as every man is towards himself, and them whom he greatly affects, partial; and therefore that strifes and troubles would be endless, except they gave their common consent, all to be ordered by some, whom they should agree upon, without which consent there would be no reason that one man should take upon him to be lord or judge over another.” Hooker’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Eccl. Pol.</abbr></i> <abbr xml:lang="la">l.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr xml:lang="la">sect.</abbr> 10. <a href="chapter-2-7.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“At the first, when some certain kind of regiment was once appointed, it may be that nothing was then farther thought upon for the manner of governing, but all permitted unto their wisdom and discretion, which were to rule, till by experience they found this for all parts very inconvenient, so as the thing which they had devised for a remedy, did indeed but increase the sore which it should have cured. They saw, that to live by one man’s will became the cause of all men’s misery. This constrained them to come unto laws, wherein all men might see their duty beforehand, and know the penalties of transgressing them.” Hooker’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Eccl. P.</abbr></i> <abbr xml:lang="la">l.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr xml:lang="la">sect.</abbr> 10. <a href="chapter-2-7.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Civil law, being the act of the whole body politic, doth therefore overrule each several part of the same body.” Hooker <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Eccl. P.</abbr></i> <abbr xml:lang="la">l.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr xml:lang="la">sect.</abbr> 10. <a href="chapter-2-7.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“At first, when some certain kind of regiment was once approved, it may be nothing was then farther thought upon for the manner of governing, but all permitted unto their wisdom and discretion, which were to rule, till by experience they found this for all parts very inconvenient, so as the thing which they had devised for a remedy, did indeed but increase the sore which it should have cured. They saw, that to live by one man’s will, became the cause of all men’s misery. This constrained them to come unto laws wherein all men might see their duty beforehand, and know the penalties of transgressing them.” Hooker’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Eccl. Pol.</abbr></i> <abbr xml:lang="la">l.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr xml:lang="la">sect.</abbr> 10. <a href="chapter-2-8.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“The lawful power of making laws to command whole politic societies of men, belonging so properly unto the same entire societies, that for any prince or potentate of what kind soever upon earth, to exercise the same of himself, and not by express commission immediately and personally received from God, or else by authority derived at the first from their consent, upon whose persons they impose laws, it is no better than mere tyranny. Laws they are not therefore which public approbation hath not made so.” Hooker’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Eccl. Pol.</abbr></i> <abbr xml:lang="la">l.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr xml:lang="la">sect.</abbr> 10. “Of this point therefore we are to note, that sith men naturally have no full and perfect power to command whole politic multitudes of men, therefore utterly without our consent, we could in such sort be at no man’s commandment living. And to be commanded we do consent, when that society, whereof we be a part, hath at any time before consented, without revoking the same by the like universal agreement.</p>
					<p>“Laws therefore human, of what kind soever, are available by consent.” <abbr>Ibid.</abbr> <a href="chapter-2-11.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Two foundations there are which bear up public societies; the one a natural inclination, whereby all men desire sociable life and fellowship; the other an order, expressly or secretly agreed upon, touching the manner of their union in living together: the latter is that which we call the law of a commonweal, the very soul of a politic body, the parts whereof are by law animated, held together, and set on work in such actions as the common good requireth. Laws politic, ordained for external order and regiment amongst men, are never framed as they should be, unless presuming the will of man to be inwardly obstinate, rebellious, and averse from all obedience to the sacred laws of his nature; in a word, unless presuming man to be, in regard of his depraved mind, little better than a wild beast, they do accordingly provide, notwithstanding, so to frame his outward actions, that they be no hindrance unto the common good, for which societies are instituted. Unless they do this, they are not perfect.” Hooker’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Eccl. Pol.</abbr></i> <abbr xml:lang="la">l.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr xml:lang="la">sect.</abbr> 10. <a href="chapter-2-11.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Human laws are measures in respect of men whose actions they must direct, howbeit such measures they are as have also their higher rules to be measured by, which rules are two, the law of God, and the law of nature; so that laws human must be made according to the general laws of nature, and without contradiction to any positive law of scripture, otherwise they are ill made.” Hooker’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Eccl. Pol.</abbr></i> <abbr xml:lang="la">l.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <abbr xml:lang="la">sect.</abbr> 9.</p>
					<p>“To constrain men to anything inconvenient doth seem unreasonable.” <abbr>Ibid.</abbr> <abbr xml:lang="la">l.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr xml:lang="la">sect.</abbr> 10. <a href="chapter-2-11.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Another copy, corrected by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Locke, has it thus, “Noxious brute that is destructive to their being.” <a href="chapter-2-15.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
